[music]
Good afternoon and welcome to your own health and fitness talk show.
I'm health integration specialist Laina Berman
and I'm here live with you every Tuesday at noon talking to you about health care
and fitness trends
and taking your phone calls. This week's show is an interview with
biologist, researcher, and medical activist
Raymond Peat. He's the true pioneer of the use of
supplemental natural progesterone among other things
and as usual I will open up the phone lines
at 1230 at 510-848-4425 for your participation.
I want to remind people if you'd like to get a tape of today's show or you need
to get hold of me after the show you can call my office during normal business
hours
and that number is 707-769-145
8. I don't
actually want to do much of an editorial today
because I have a lot to discuss with Dr. Peat and I want to get right into the
show
but I'd like to give you some information about why
the show is so important to me and why I chose
Dr. Peat to come on the air with us today.
It was roughly 15 years ago I went to a lecture,
a small talk actually at UCSF and
Ray Peat was there speaking and he spoke
a bit about among other things some
research that had been done on the topic of helplessness
using animals. It was unfortunate, I mean animal rights people would not like
this research but
they had done an experiment that proved that when animals
were made to feel helpless they lost the will to live
and he was discussing this
in the context of how it affects patients who are caught
in a chronic illness cycle and are in a cycle of being
treated constantly and being dependent on treatment. He also
spoke about the use of natural progesterone
and thyroid medication as
things that excite the cells and help
the body to pull out of an inhibitory state. His
work is very controversial although
some of the things, many of the things, most of the things that he said
that I heard 15 years ago now are considered
sort of the new wave of information
in somewhat alternative health although even in mainstream
health some of the swings that we've made from polyunsaturated oils to
recognizing the use of saturated fats for cooking and various things
and certainly the use of progesterone, natural progesterone
and thyroid medication and the problem that people have with thyroid.
I have chosen to do a show with him and I want you to understand that
you may find a lot of what he has to say
confusing and controversial but I want you to maintain an open mind
as I do with him at all times and
consider what he has to say and try it on for yourself.
As with all the shows that I do I want you
to think for yourself but it's a rare opportunity to have Dr. Pete available
to us
and I think that he's a very important researcher and I think you ought to
listen carefully to what he has to say.
In ways of an introduction Raymond Pete has a doctorate in biology from
University of Oregon with a specialization in physiology.
His books include Mind and Tissue,
Progesterone in Orthomolecular Medicine, Nutrition for Women and Generative
Energy. He's taught at the University of Oregon, Urbana College,
Montana State University, National College of Naturopathic Medicine,
Universidad de Veracruz, Ana,
and the Universidad Autonoma del
Estado de Mexico. He founded Blake College which is an international
university.
Dr. Pete in addition does independent research,
continues to do it, thank goodness for all of us, and private endocrine and
nutritional
counseling. Some of you have just been introduced to Dr. Pete because
he's mentioned in Dr. John Lee's book What Your Doctor May Not Know About
Metapause
as Dr. Lee's inspiration for his research
on natural progesterone. So without any further delay I'd like to welcome you
to the show. Are you there Ray? Yeah, yeah, hi. Hi.
Thanks so much for taking the time. I thought that was a good context
you created talking about the helplessness
thing because since Dr. Lee's
book came out I've been hearing from people who
say I just want progesterone for my bones or
whatever and I think the real meaning
of any of these natural supplements or substances
is that they
participate in everything.
Their physiology and ecology are
tied together in a system and these things are important because
they're sort of central links in this ecological, physiological
system but even inside the perception
of power or helplessness can make
a tremendous difference in how these
hormones work and when people think of them as
products or drugs
they are almost certain to misuse them in some way.
Well, the reason I brought up the research on helplessness is because
essentially hearing the lecture that you gave let me out of a cage
and I had a completely different view of my health after that and it
had a profound effect on me. I think
it's a good segue to talk about what you talk about when you talk about an
inhibitory state which is the same as what you just started to say
so that I want you to talk about the fact that we're not just talking about
progesterone, we're talking about the way for instance our
modern diet has suppressed thyroid function in the way that all of these
systems work together.
The idea of the inhibitory
state comes largely from
Pavlovian tradition and Pavlov
saw three basic biological states,
one in which you're so well rested and prepared
that you could respond
to challenges without being stressed and
the other, that was high inhibition,
readiness and the low state of being inhibited
is sort of protection against
overstimulation and in between
is the range of stress and
energy is needed to put us up into the readiness
state where we're relaxed and able to cope with
without experiencing the stress reaction and
we think of cortisol and the glucocorticoids
as the central stress handling
hormones but the brain is
set up such that ACTH
which turns on the adrenal hormones such as cortisol
ACTH is produced in response
to a substance which is only produced when we're deficient
in pregnenolone and thyroid, the precursor materials
and so that when you're in that
replenished state with enough pregnenolone
you don't even resort to the stress
reaction. That's the latest
biological meaning of the high state of
inhibition or readiness.
So to make it accessible to people who are listening
many of us you know have been as we
often like to say running on adrenaline instead of
something more sustaining and
there's a lot of adrenal exhaustion in people with autoimmune diseases and
whatnot
so part of what happens is there's a wheel and somewhere along the line you
have to be able to stick a stick in the wheel to make it stop
what is the stick? What's the first stick?
Adequate protein and sodium
are very crucial
for the average American. Adequate high-quality protein is
needed before your liver can regulate
your blood sugar and all of the hormones
and without that you tend to
waste your minerals and sodium is a key mineral
and so people who are on low protein and low sodium
diets are doing exactly what
puts them into the stress situation.
And as I understand there are foods that you believe
suppress thyroid function which is another key to this yes?
Yeah, these low sodium and low thyroid
are sort of basic
things to think about but there's a whole
layer of American foods and
they're worldwide poison. You can see belts
of thyroid disease and tuberculosis for example
wherever people eat too much cabbage
or too many beans and lentils.
These foods are the classical
traditional thyroid inhibitors
but chemically it's the
essential fatty acids
so-called the unsaturated fats
that are becoming very important to Americans
and thyroid and progesterone function.
Okay, well the reason both of us are laughing is because we've had no
end of conversations about essential fatty acids because
I don't know how I feel about this. I'm rather alarmed by what Raymond is
saying
but I'm confused because when you go to
at least what I've seen in biochemical and nutrition textbooks
they say that, you know, the premise I think that Ray is talking about is that
saturated fat will turn into
essential fat but my understanding is that saturated oil can't turn into
long-chain
omega-3s and that although Paleolithic
meat had it in it because the animals were eating leafy greens
since we're now eating corn-fed meat
we're not going to get it outside.
Omega-3 and omega-6
are the things that people are
currently conscious of because of vast marketing
campaign that has been going on for 40 years
but when we aren't given
these things which inhibit these external
unsaturated fats, inhibit our own enzyme
systems and when we are not saturated with these
enzyme inhibitors our own
cells produce omega-9
unsaturated fatty acids. Coconut oil and
olive oil are very similar to what
the baby produces
when it's not, when it's relatively insulated
and if you take cells and grow them in culture
they grow wonderfully in a completely
unsaturated oil free culture medium
showing that human cells whether
in the developing fetus or in the laboratory
dish do a fine job of producing unsaturated fat
and in fact have
more cellular vitality than when they're exposed to these
environmental oils. Okay well just again to make it accessible
what you're really saying is to stay
away from vegetable oils correct? Yeah
for example the degree of unsaturation
linoleic with three double bonds
or linoleic acid with two double bonds
in proportion to the number of double bonds
they poison the thyroid function
at every known level. The synthesis
the transport and the response
in two or three different ways inside the cells
are strongly poisoned by the
three unsaturated groups and
significantly inhibited by the
two double bonds of linoleic acid. I told you guys this would be
going against everything else you've been hearing and truly it is
we're gonna run out of time and one of the things I want to make sure we go
over is that
I think what we've just said is that eating
unsaturated polyunsaturated oils is
thyroid inhibitory not eating enough protein also
inhibits thyroid function and don't you also believe the grains
do the same thing? Well the whole grains
contain a variety of toxins that are put there
to protect the next generation of the plants
the plants put their worst poisons in their seeds
and the next level of toxicity in their leaves
to prevent bugs and grazers from
killing them. Fruits and roots
are where the vegetable matter is least
toxic but the unsaturated oils in the seeds are part of the
cells that the plants defense against being
eaten and digested.
So when we start to talk about being careful what you eat because it may
inhibit your thyroid function
the reason we're saying that is because even people who are testing normal
for thyroid function but have cold hands and have below normal temperatures and
maybe are just slightly low in thyroid function
often also are estrogen dominant
and this includes some men.
As your thyroid goes down your estrogen comes up
a very neat connection which is because your liver
needs both protein and thyroid to get rid of estrogen
and when your liver function decreases your estrogen automatically
piles up. Okay just a quick
ID for the show this is your own health and fitness I'm health integration
specialist Lena Berman and I'm on the phone with
biologist and I would say medical I'd like to call you a medical
activist
Raymond Pete who
is a rare guest and a very important guest and we're talking about the
relationship between
a diet and the various hormones and steroids that exist in our bodies
including thyroid
and progesterone. We'll open up the phone lines
maybe at 1230 I may actually extend the interview a little bit let's see
how we do.
So what happens when you're throwing off the estrogen balance in the
body and again to remind people this is not just
women this is men and particularly because we're living in an environment
with a lot of xenoestrogens and foods that have estrogen like
like soy this can happen in men as well.
This leaves us susceptible am I right to autoimmune
dysfunction? Yeah there are several good
books available on the role of
estrogen in autoimmune diseases. It's
very central to autoimmune
degenerative diseases. In our hamster lab
many years ago some of the researchers saw that
estrogen first causes overdevelopment of
the adrenal cortex in the animals and
as they increase the dose it reached the point that it killed the adrenal cells.
It in essence is a
stress hormone. Hans Zellye in the 1940s described it as the shock
hormone. It imitates everything of shock and stress.
Because it's this sort of line of thinking I think and reading
I was going to ask you about where you're looking what research
you've been looking at that brings up this stuff about polyunsaturated oils
because in many of our conversations you've said this research is very old
about the carcinogenic the potential carcinogenic effect of polyunsaturated oils.
The oldest study that I know of was 1927 in
Germany in which they showed that a fat-free diet
in rats caused them to be essentially free of spontaneous
cancer and just in the last
several years researchers have demonstrated that
as you increase the amount of unsaturated oil
in the diet there's almost a straight line
associated increase of the development of cancer.
Yeah and so saturated fat apparently doesn't do this in your estimation?
No and saturated fat is for many years it's known to
be pro-immunity.
Yeah of course there's all this stuff about heart disease that everybody's getting
excited about though and
people do well go ahead.
The Broderbarn's books on heart disease are probably the best
introduction to this even though the Schutt
family started in the 1930s showing how
estrogen promotes blood clots but
Broderbarn's work shows that
low thyroid which of course is caused by too much unsaturated fats
is the main cause for
degenerative circulatory disease and
the research of just the last few years is showing
that in fact unsaturated fats are highly
atherogenic. The free radical reaction
which is developed in thyroid deficient animals
causes the blood vessels to be the first
site of attack as these unsaturated fats
are either eaten or drawn out of
the fat storage tissues. They are exposed to
oxygen in the bloodstream, produce free radicals
and attack the lining of the blood vessels.
Just to again to break this down for people what we're talking about
is a real hunter-gatherer diet that's what we're talking about is eating a
very strict hunter-gatherer diet that is
probably forty percent protein and includes
probably some cooked vegetables
well-cooked and tubers, potatoes
and fruit. But
let's go back to progesterone because
you're really quite famous for this now and talk about the link and how
progesterone works
to help with this again to put a stick in the wheel.
Okay, the reason
cholesterol is high in low thyroid people
and this was neatly established in the 1930s
that they took high cholesterol to be diagnostic of
low thyroid because you can demonstrate such a neat
up-and-down relationship. For example a month ago I saw
two people who wanted to pass a
health test in a few days lower their cholesterol
200 points in about three or four days
just by adjusting their thyroid.
So thyroid is what
makes you regulate your cholesterol but it
does it largely by turning cholesterol
into steroids starting with pregnenolone
and progesterone being
one of the major products so that
if you have adequate thyroid and cholesterol
and vitamin A your cholesterol is going to be turned
efficiently into progesterone and
these are the hormones that prevent the stress reaction
that involves cortisone and adrenaline.
Okay, well that's a big if because for many of us even those of us
who I mean as we've talked about before there are many people who already have
autoimmune disease
and maybe you're supplementing with thyroid now so part of this
has to do with supplementation of thyroid and progesterone because this
sort of
mechanism of getting well again after the damage has been done
is a slow one, no? Yeah and the unsaturated fats
also poison the for example ovaries
and brain cells directly. I just hate it when you talk this way.
It makes me nuts. Go ahead.
There are other things such as iron overload
or unsaturated fat excess or vitamin
E deficiency that poison the progesterone producing
cells but the basic thing is
having enough cholesterol, vitamin A and thyroid to produce
these protective hormones. Okay so some people are starting to take extra
supplemental thyroid again I'm looking at trying to stop the wheel
and people are introducing
natural progesterone as a supplement to help the absorption of the thyroid
and to lower you know to contest the estrogen. Am I okay?
Progesterone facilitates function of the thyroid gland
and that is a potential side effect of taking progesterone because
everyone who's low in progesterone is
going to have some kind of thyroid malfunction
because the thyroid is blocked in its function by
estrogen and activated by progesterone
so if it has been blocked and has a store
of hormone when you take progesterone sometimes
it starts the thyroid working too fast as it
unloads this bulk.
Okay so then we've got
people who are getting older. First we've got people who maybe are even
really young
that are still having trouble with the thyroid being inhibited and
the autoimmune diseases and they're taking progesterone
and this is again, men can take this as well, no?
Then we start to get people who are getting middle-aged
and things start to change and that's when I think
you like people to consider if they're ill or maybe not only ill to consider
supplementing with pregnenolone
and you know I asked, I think I told you I asked Michael Colgan
who is a sports nutrition specialist about pregnenolone. He went, "Oh no, it
makes, you know, makes cortisol and people who are exercising will make cortisol and
that won't be good." So
tell me, tell everybody about that. The one hormonal
effect that has been seen consistently
and it's the only thing that shows up
in when you study
animals or people who are given pregnenolone, the
only hormonal consequence is that if their cortisone
is elevated, pregnenolone brings it down to normal.
That's because the elevation of cortisol
is connected through mechanisms
in the brain circuitry.
High cortisol is a symptom of a
pregnenolone deficiency and once you get your cortisone
down by having enough pregnenolone, then any amount of pregnenolone you take
has no hormonal action whatsoever
but you need to be saturated otherwise
you are going to resort to cortisone and cortisone
is the basic thing that ages the skin, the brain cells,
the bones. Every cell is
aged faster under the influence of cortisone.
Okay, and then pregnenolone usually advise people after 50
to do. Incidentally, just to let you know, I am going to go long on this
interview. What I'll do is I'll still break at 1230 for about 30 seconds
and you guys who are listening who want to call in, please
try to maybe write to me questions down because we'll probably have to move quickly through the calls
and then when we come back from break I'm going to go ahead with the interview for
maybe another 10 minutes because there's
several things I want to sort of go through with Ray before I open up the phone line.
So start listing your questions down so we can move through them quickly.
Pregnenolone after 50.
Now we've got the vitamin companies are pushing DHEA.
So why don't you explain how that fits in? Okay, pregnenolone
turns into either progesterone or DHEA
and DHEA happens to be close
to testosterone and estrogen. It's in the sex hormone pathway.
And progesterone happens to be in
the adrenal pathway. It's the main
protection. It's a very powerful protection against
all of the adrenal hormones so that
you don't even need your adrenal glands.
Hans Zellye demonstrated that the adrenals can be removed
and the animal is happy and lives its full lifespan
if given progesterone. So progesterone is necessary to make the adrenal hormones
but it's the basic protection against an
excess of them. So these
two pathways are both kept supplied
by pregnenolone. And you know I'm not
I'm telling especially women to sort of stay clear of DHEA because I think that
that's the wrong step in the pathway.
I knew a middle-aged man who
was taking DHEA and had his liver was expanding so large I had him
get his estrogen measured and his
estrogen was high for a young woman.
And a few days after he stopped the DHEA
his estrogen level was down to normal
but his liver now a year later is still like a watermelon.
And in rat studies DHEA is
highly carcinogenic to the liver. It stimulates first
enlargement of the liver and sometimes shrinkage of the thymus because of
its overflow into the thymolytic
sex hormones, estrogen and testosterone. But
it is chronically a great risk of liver cancer.
So the way to encourage production of it would be
after 50 or so people who
who want to can supplement with pregnenolone instead?
Yeah and if you have adequate cholesterol
I think of people as being lucky if they have cholesterol of 250 because
that means all they have to do is take thyroid
until they have brought their cholesterol down
to about 170 or so
and at that point the abundance of cholesterol
is a great benefit because it makes them able to produce pregnenolone and
progesterone and DHEA.
Okay, that makes a lot of sense actually.
I'm going to break in a moment here
but when we come back what I want to ask you about is men and progesterone.
Also I want to make something clear to people.
We're talking about natural progesterone
not progestins, not pharmaceutically altered
hormones that are sold by pharmaceutical companies and patented that are changed.
We're talking about natural
progesterone that is synthesized still from natural sources but not changed, not
altered.
We'll talk about some sources of that when we get back. So let me
take a brief musical break. When we come back I'm going to continue the interview
for another 10 minutes or so.
At about 1240 I'll open up the phone lines. This is your own health and fitness talk
show.
I'm Lena Berman on the phone with Dr. Raymond Peat. We'll be right back.
[Music]
Welcome back.
Welcome back. This is your own health and fitness talk show. I'm Lena Berman,
health integration specialist.
I'm on the phone with Dr. Raymond Peat, a biologist and researcher.
I'm holding off on opening the phone lines for another 10 minutes because we
have an awful lot to talk about.
At about 1240 I'll open them up. Raymond,
we were talking about pregnenolone and I'd like to move to progesterone,
natural progesterone
in its use for men and also you discovered
that it's good for the relief of migraine headaches.
Hans Zellye
discovered all of the basic properties of progesterone. I think
his technicians reported that they had killed
all of his rats in one experiment with progesterone and he
said he couldn't believe that and he fished the dead
rats out of the garbage and found that they were just profoundly
anesthetized. It turns out that
when healthy animals are in their last day or two of
pregnancy, people have put them on electrified
floors and they don't even notice that they're being shocked because
the progesterone that's naturally present for childbirth
is putting them in a literally anesthetized
state even though they're apparently happy and
moving around. Don't try this at home people.
Most of the progesterone that has been researched
in humans, the maximum doses they give
injecting 6,000 milligrams for example,
made people drowsy but never put them
into an actual anesthetic unconsciousness but
that's because the solvent
drop crystals of progesterone when you inject it
or if you take the powder it doesn't dissolve
in ordinary oils but if you take it dissolved in vitamin E so it actually
gets into the bloodstream,
the progesterone has this
rising series of
effects which at the peak is
a highly protected but anesthetized
condition. Short of that state it
protects against harmful
stimuli. For example,
some of the amino acids are called excitotoxic amino acids
and the basic protection against these which are
normal brain transmitters but
they happen to excite brain cells to death.
The brain's normal protection against cell death
produced by these ordinary transmitters is progesterone
and to some extent pregnenolone does the same thing. They are the only two
hormones that work with the other transmitter called
GABA which puts the brain in a protected resting state
and prevents the stress damage.
Okay, so we've done a segue here instead of talking about
men and progesterone, what we've talked about is that it's not possible really to
overdose
on progesterone. Although you know one of the questions that
came up for me is why can't you become progesterone dominant?
Well, on the way up the scale towards protecting everything
it's also protective against salt imbalance
and imbalance of the sex steroids and
that means that it protects your thymus and immune system against destruction by
the stress hormones
or the sex hormones. So it's extremely important
in the sense of being protective but it also neutralizes
the male hormones and
so this is at a very low level
in men it begins to neutralize
the testosterone and
so a man wants to be conscious that there is this
deadly rising protective function and
if they don't want to be protected against
having whiskers and other typically male
traits, they don't want to take
more than just a very few milligrams a day,
two or three milligrams a day is about enough to
offer general protection without neutralizing them
sexually. Oh, I didn't think it had any feminizing effect. No, it isn't
feminizing in the sense of
not being either estrogen
affected or testosterone effect. Oh, that's interesting because I thought it did, I
thought when women took
progesterone that it does increase their testosterone levels. No.
Well, why does the libido come back then in women? Well, because
the estrogen as a shock hormone
causes protective loss of libido
at some point and by stopping that shock reaction
the libido comes back and
men can still function even with
their testosterone highly neutralized so
they feel like they've just come out of a cold shower but
the brain still knows how to make everything
function. This would be nasty though if the woman is taking progesterone and the man's
taking too much it could get really ugly.
Well, it doesn't really prevent potency.
Well, just interest I would think after a cold shower.
But it sounds like taking a very small amount of progesterone for men will be
protection against
maybe something that we loosely call andropause or male menopause and
prostatitis and prostate disease.
It has been used largely in Europe
to shrink enlarged prostates and
I've seen it happen at a very moderate dose that doesn't even
affect their sexuality. It'll shrink an enlarged
prostate. Okay, a couple of quick things.
I think what we're saying, so what you're saying about the headaches is that it
has an anesthetic effect. Yeah, and it
stops the vascular problems that are involved in the blind spots of migraine.
In two of my worst migraines
ever I found that in a minute and a half the headache
totally resolved and
in women it is less likely to have such a
quick massive effect because women are likely to have a much higher
estrogen level. Estrogen causes nerve
sensitivities which can
culminate in epilepsy but migraine is the lower
grade of this estrogen poisoning and
the effect on the vascular system of progesterone is
in the direction of digitalis. It's considered to be the body's
own heart and circulation regulatory substance
which is affected by digitalis and this means that
it tones up for example varicose veins or
bulging veins on the backs of your hands are an easy way to see a progesterone
deficiency but
that's what happens in a migraine. The bulging veins
impair circulation. Ray, very quickly, do you
completely disapprove of ever supplementing with estrogen if women
have vaginal atrophy and
stuff like that? Yeah, because of the side effects.
There must be a lot of other hormones that people could research
without going right to the most
dangerous shock hormone, estrogen. So your sense is that if women are having
those even with progesterone
supplementation? Researchers have found that vitamin A in progesterone and
even DHEA very often
it seems to be the missing factor. Okay, now you're confusing people.
So you're saying after menopause when women are experiencing
maybe some specific symptoms intervaginally
that rather than use estrogen that in that situation maybe DHEA is
appropriate? What about testosterone?
Yeah, people have been researching all of those and
all of them seem to affect at least
some of the women and so I think it's better to check them out in the order of
safety like with pregnenolone,
thyroid, progesterone first and then try
as your last resort, try the one that
tends to kill you sooner. That makes sense, so thyroid and pregnenolone
first, that makes sense.
You've had some success treating Graves' disease with pregnenolone. I mean
they're
irradiating people's thyroids for Graves. Yeah, there's published
stuff using what I consider mild
doses of pregnenolone. All of their people, the eyes receded
and in my few experiences
the eyes just sort of were sucked back into the head.
It's such a dramatic process that
you have to see what it can do to
deformed arthritic joints or
emphysema in which there's almost no oxygen getting through the lungs
or in this state of Graves' disease
in which there's a gelatinous material behind the eyeball.
The valves of the heart can get the same gelatinous deposit which is
historically thought of as a low
thyroid product, a glycoprotein,
but pregnenolone has the most dramatic
almost instantaneous effect. Like in an hour you can
see results. Okay, what I want people to do is to make sure you get a pencil and
paper because I want Ray to give out
his PO box number and his address.
I'm sorry, his PO box number and if you'd like to, Ray, also your phone
number in a second because
you actually make an oil which is the vitamin E oil with progesterone which is
much stronger than the creams that are available on the market
and I think it's a very effective way of supplementing
for progesterone and it's easily gotten by ordering it from you by mail
including all of your books which are self-published and available
by ordering them from you by mail. But you know what? You never send a protocol
with your progesterone oil so I'm
getting no end to phone calls. Yeah, people should read the book
and become their own expert because like I said at
the beginning, it's always
individual and progesterone is just
one of the central factors in a whole
physiological ecological problem and usually you can fix the
problem with diet and if not just diet then thyroid
and I think of progesterone just as one of the
first aids in repairing the problem but
not the answer. Okay, so the book being "Progesterone in
Molecular Medicine" but given that people should
use their body and their understanding to help to treat themselves
how much progesterone is in say
an eighth of a teaspoon of your oil? 50 milligrams
but you can't think in terms of what doctors often talk about because
that's enough to make some people a little bit drunk.
That's three times the normal day's dose.
Okay, so maybe a sixteenth of a teaspoon is a better starting dose
and how much vitamin E is in that dose?
Well, the solvent is vitamin E, it's 90 percent of
the quantity and so if you have
25 milligrams of substance
it's going to be about
200 units of vitamin E.
Great, I'm so glad to know this now. You have no idea how many phone calls I get on this.
Alright, your PO Box and your phone number?
PO Box 5764
5764. Eugene, Oregon
97405. Okay, and you want to give out your phone number?
No. Okay, so if people want to do a consultation with you?
Yeah, they can write to the post office box.
PO Box 5764. Eugene, Oregon
97405 and you also have a newsletter which is $24 for 12 issues
a year and you can I assume send people information on how much each book costs?
Yeah. Okay, I also have a list of the books and the PO Box
at the front desk of KPFA so people after the show if you get confused can call
510-848-6767 to get some of the information we just gave out, you know, the PO Box.
Alright, I am going to open up the phone lines at long last for those of you who have been waiting
patiently.
This is your own health and fitness talk show. I'm health integration specialist
Laina Berman and I've been on the phone
for the last 45 minutes. It's been very luxurious with Raymond Pete,
PhD, a biologist and researcher. We're going to open up the phone lines now at
510-848-4425. Again, 510-848-4425.
Please remember to turn your radio down before we pick you up. And let's move to
our first caller.
Caller, you're on the air with your own health and fitness. Yeah,
I was curious about how much progesterone you need to
take to treat migraine headaches because I have been getting them
and I do think they're hormonally related.
Like I said, the problem is to balance the estrogen
and it's hard to tell how much estrogen a woman has
to balance and so a dose that would
not touch a headache in one person might make the other one
so drunk they couldn't walk for several hours.
So I would say not to try more than
50 milligrams at a dose but then repeat it
every 15 minutes until the headache is gone.
And the efficient way
to prevent them is to take thyroid or optimize your own
thyroid production so that your estrogen
is controlled to a reasonable degree
and then it takes little or no progesterone
because the estrogen
is able to be controlled. Okay, caller, thank you.
You know, you've also mentioned Broderbarn's books but they are in fact
out of print, am I right?
Yeah, I think so. Okay, so maybe libraries, Broderbarn, B-R-O-D-E-R,
B-A-R-N... B-R-O-D-A was his first name.
B-A-R-N-E-S. B-R-O-D-A-
B-A-R-N-E-S, Broderbarn's.
Maybe in the library. Okay, let's move to another caller.
Caller, you're on the air with KPFA. Yes,
I was diagnosed with Hashimoto's disease... Along with everybody else in the world.
...six months ago with an astronomically high
level of thyroid antibodies. I have no
symptoms which can clearly be
traced to it and I've now, you know,
reached a dose of Synthroid which, you know, balances out my blood test
but there's no change in the way that I feel.
There's a lot of history involved here but
in the practical point that I've seen is that,
for example, any tissue which is
injured, like they have experimentally twisted a piece of cartilage
and found that just that small amount of
disruption causes it to raise
antibodies from its own body and so
any tissue which is under stress is going to have
antibodies as part of a cleanup process.
So don't worry about the diagnosis or the antibodies because
everyone who corrects their thyroid function
that I've seen has corrected their
antibody level after about a year of good functioning but
the real problem is that in the 1940s
it was known that almost half of Americans were hypothyroid
and got over their symptoms whether it was diabetes or heart disease or
infections
when they were given adequate thyroid but a drug company came out
with the test for protein-bound iodine in the blood
and they found that 95 percent of the population
had enough of that and so were not hypothyroid
and that indoctrinated the whole country to believe that
only five percent of the population is
really hypothyroid but in the 60s
it turned out that that test was complete nonsense
that didn't measure anything of significance but
what stuck was the doctrine that 95 percent of the people
are not hypothyroid and the
synthroid type thyroxine
was tested in the 1940s on
young male medical students who were healthy
and they said oh it works just like thyroid
but the fact is that it was not tested on women
and women because of the high estrogen
that is exaggerated by low thyroid
women who are low thyroid have
almost a complete inability to respond
to thyroxine because it has to be activated by the liver
and over and over I see women who get
more and more hypothyroid as they take more and
more thyroxine and
sometimes this happens in men sometimes men
can respond because their livers are not as poisoned by estrogen
I'm sorry to do this Ray but you know I actually know a lot of people who
taking a combination of medications including some synthroid have done
really well
so I don't know. Sometimes it works but
it's utterly unscientific. That may be so actually
but then there's that quality of the body as a laboratory
well it's better than nothing for sure but it very often goes the wrong
direction
Collar thank you for your call. I guess we should move
you know let me ask you something if people were to experiment with
losing a lot of people are supplementing with essential fats like primrose oil
and flaxseed oil and everything
because it makes them feel better when I asked you about that initially you said
because
it has an inhibitory effect on the immune system and so you get less inflamed
because of that
how would you stop taking something like that if it's making you feel better
fish oils are the ones that are more effective
anti-inflammatory agents but
there's a generalized anti-immune function such that
they used to sell emulsions for intravenous use of
vegetable oils as feeding for cancer patients but
since it made the patients die faster then they discovered that it was
destroying their immune systems now they use the very same emulsions
for organ transplant patients just because it does
suppress immunity. Okay so basically maybe
up the fish oils get rid of the other stuff is a transitional thing
possibly anyway let's let's move to some more collars
Collar you're on the air with KPFA do you have a question? Hello
yes I've had chronic fatigue syndrome for
15 years do you have any information that might help me
yeah very often it starts
with either thyroid or beans in the diet
or beans are very common dietary factor
they contain antigens that
make them a more complex
toxin that cause
the liver and the intestine and the thyroid
to malfunction and
you can break the cycle sometimes just with diet
but usually thyroid is an important
thing to consider. Okay, Hunter Gather Diet.
I think I've talked about it in newsletters
one called the bean syndrome which involves
muscle soreness as well as chronic fatigue
several people have written about it in the past but
can people get back issues of your newsletters?
I don't like to mention that because it
takes a long time to find the back issues. What about Nutrition for Women
your book does it talk about it there?
No I think the progesterone book is the one
people should start with. Okay, Collar thank you for your call
thank you. Let's move to another. Collar you're on the air
yeah I wasn't listening to the beginning of the show so I don't know whether you spoke about this but
when you're talking about treating low thyroid how do you treat it?
Oh boy I don't know if we can give you a short answer we've got a lot of people
waiting to call in
it depends on where you're starting from sometimes
four ounces of orange juice every hour
through the day for several days is all it takes to
activate the thyroid. Sometimes it takes adding
eggs or milk to the diet. If you're not allergic?
Yeah depending on what the limiting
factor is in your thyroid problem sometimes
one dose of progesterone can
break a person out of the cycle. Sometimes
dropping out vegetable oils or beans or nuts or seeds
is all it takes. Yes switching to a higher protein diet without those
items in it and low grain too the grain is irritating as well
yeah. Okay Collar thank you. Let's move on
Collar you there? Go ahead please.
We're having some... Hello? Yeah are you there? Oh yeah gee I don't know
great okay. Go ahead please. Hello can you hear me?
Yes please go ahead. Have you done any research on the connection between
high estrogen levels and fibroid tumors
or and obesity? Of course. Sure that was
well documented by 1950 Alexander Lipschut
and his group showed that the very
smallest incredibly small dose of
estrogen that he used if it was allowed to act continuously
without interruption by pregnenolone or progesterone or thyroid
was first produced
fibromas in the uterus then the breast
then the intestine then
the fibromas tended to progress eventually to cancer of every organ
he was one of the people who documented the natural history
of estrogen induced cancers and
fibromas are just an early influence of estrogen
primarily in the uterus and breast but ultimately
in all connective tissues and
other types of cell. What can you do about it?
Thyroid is the basic thing I've had people
get into a slightly hyper thyroid state taking
a good balanced thyroid supplement
and month by month they have documented that the thyroid alone
is able to shrink the uterine fibroid
really without using progesterone? Yeah the progesterone
was tested and does work but partly it works through the
thyroid and the essential thing is to take enough thyroid to get your estrogen
way down
even below normal for a while. Where do you get it? You have to go to the doctor. Yeah you do and that's
going to be an interesting argument I don't even want to hear that argument
Collar thank you for your call. Good luck. I actually
have heard of people just changing in my experience with clients that I've had
just changing their diet and getting rid of the grains getting the protein out
getting rid of the beans getting rid of the soy
and getting them on some supplemental progesterone and it has worked
That's ultimately the best thing but if they're in a hurry to have a baby or
something
they can speed it up. You have to get some black market thyroid.
Alright let's take just one or two more quick calls. Collar you're on the air
Hi I was just wondering I missed the very beginning of the show
and what in what relation are you talking about the thyroid right now?
Well you know what we're not going to be able to go back because it's way too
but you can order a tape of the show and if you take my number down at the end. Okay well then I've
got a question. Okay.
I eat a diet very high in beans
and grains and I've been experiencing lots of fatigue
Right that's what we've been talking about. Thyroid symptoms, my thyroid has been kind of
I've been noticing it which is unusual. Ray did you pay this guy?
A few weeks ago there was an article in the newspaper about China
having 25 million Cretans and 100 million hypothyroid
people at least and just a couple days after that article
someone said but you say soy is
poisonous because it's estrogenic and anti thyroid. What about all the Asians?
And I said yeah it's proven that it causes
hypothyroidism. Collar I've made it my mission
since I've been on the radio to get people to look at this problem it's not
that I have some kind of
moral thing about vegetarian diets I just found that they're not entirely
healthy for everyone.
Yeah I'm not entirely vegetarian I do eat meat occasionally.
Well you can experiment with dropping the beans and
pulling back on the vegetable oils and certainly not cooking with vegetable oils
and eating more
potatoes. Yeah don't do that.
Ordinary potatoes especially if they're fried in coconut oil
are often fantastically
therapeutic for people with a dietary problem.
That's a long story but potatoes have an extremely high quality protein.
What do you think of protein supplements? You know what we're not going to have
to, I'll let Ray answer you real quick.
They're generally produced under oxidative conditions that damage the
protein
seriously so you can get much better protein
much cheaper from natural milk and eggs or potatoes.
We're going to have to stop. I don't want to stop but we have to stop.
Ray Peet we've given out a PO box for him it's at the front desk of KPFA.
If people need it you can call
848-6767. Ray thank you so much we're going to have to have you back if you're
willing to do it.
Okay thanks again. Okay thank you. Bye bye for now.
I'm Lena Berman and I want to thank you for listening.
If you need more information or want a cassette copy of this or any other in
the series Your Own Health and Fitness
you can call my information number 24 hours a day at 707-874-2772
For a list of other available shows, information about guests and news about the non-profit,
the benefits of membership and to listen to the show free online
go to the website yourownhealthandfitness.org
Your Own Health and Fitness is a joint production of Your Own Health and Fitness
and KPFA FM. The engineer for Your Own Health and Fitness is Vinnie Beacham.
Remember being informed not only protects your health,
it protects your freedom.
[Music]